Wireshark blog post: 2021-01-18 rework (#598)
grpc/grpc.io: content/en/blog/wireshark.md

---
draft: true
spelling: cSpell:ignore addressbook Chalin Huang pcapng Qiangxiong subdissectors tcpdump Wireshark
title: Analyzing gRPC messages using Wireshark
date: 2021-01-18
authors:
- name: Huang Qiangxiong
  link: https://github.com/huangqiangxiong
- name: Patrice Chalin (editor)

>   link: https://github.com/chalin

Author: Given the extensive revisions made to the post, I've added myself as an editor. Let me know if you're ok with that.

The main features of the gRPC and Protobuf dissectors are the following:

- Support dissecting (decoding) gRPC messages serialized in the
  [protocol buffer wire format][] or as JSON

- Support dissecting gRPC messages of unary, server streaming, client streaming,
  and bidirectional streaming RPC calls

- Enhanced dissection of serialized protocol buffers data by allowing
  you to do the following:
  - Load relevant `.proto` files
  - Register your own subdissectors for protocol buffer fields of type `byte` or
    `string`

## Capturing gRPC traffic

This post focuses on the analysis of captured gRPC messages. To learn how to
store network traffic in _capture files_, see [Capturing Live Network Data][]
from the [Wireshark User’s Guide][].

{{< alert title="Note" color="info" >}}
  Currently, Wireshark can only parse **plain text** gRPC messages. While
  [Wireshark supports TLS dissection][], it requires per-session secret keys. As
  of the time of writing, gRPC libraries do not support the exporting of such

>   keys.

Author: I've updated the text in the alert, PTAL.

-->
![wireshark_protobuf_search_paths](/img/wireshark_protobuf_search_paths.png)

By selecting the **Load all files** option for the app's protocol directory you
enable preloading of message definitions from the `addressbook.proto` file.

### Setting port traffic type

From the Wireshark [SampleCaptures page][], download the following app's sample gRPC capture file:
[grpc_person_search_protobuf_with_image.pcapng][].

<!--
TODO: Why port 50052? I'm not seeing any traffic over port 50052 in the
      screenshots. Is it actually used?
-->
The app's gRPC traffic was captured on ports 50051 and 50052. Before you can
decode these messages, first register these ports as carrying HTTP2 traffic:

<!--
TODO: Clarify: how does the user access this configuration pane?
TODO: Is the port 18127 relevant to this blog post, if not, can you remove it?
TODO: Is the path "C:\Users\...decode_as_entries" actually part of the dialog? If not, can you remove it?
-->
![wireshark_decode_as_dialog](/img/wireshark_decode_as_dialog.png)

### Decoding the search request message

<!--
TODO: What are the steps that the user needs to follow before the user can see

>       the decoded message as shown in the screenshot?

Author: > Just after setting up the **Protobuf search paths** and decode traffic on 50051 as HTTP2.

Then the decoded messages appear without any user action, or does the user need to select a command from a menu or some part of the active window?

>       the decoded message as shown in the screenshot?

Author: For example, I assume that the user at least has to select the request message itself.

>       the decoded message as shown in the screenshot?

Author: I've added some text. PTAL.
Btw, what is the "No." column in the screenshot?

>       the decoded message as shown in the screenshot?

Reviewer: I list the steps by using some **gif** and **mp4** files that may help you to understand the process:

## 1. Open "Protobuf Search Paths" dialog:
![wireshark_open_protobuf_search_paths](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105350543-4f11a080-5c26-11eb-851e-2335510e1758.gif)

Corresponding video is here https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105350545-5042cd80-5c26-11eb-9868-80a3d50dcb13.mp4

## 2. There are two ways to open "Decode As" dialog:

### 2.1 By "Analyze->Decode As" menu:
![wireshark_open_decode_as1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105350527-4a4cec80-5c26-11eb-9df9-77452d8e8dbf.gif)
Corresponding video is
https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105350531-4b7e1980-5c26-11eb-8c5c-538df9530963.mp4

### 2.2 By right click menu and select "Decode As..." item:
![wireshark_open_decode_as2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105350533-4caf4680-5c26-11eb-9128-9d1389744db4.gif)
Corresponding video is
https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105350538-4de07380-5c26-11eb-9727-8216f0481e1d.mp4
> Note that after running "Decode As", the packet list panel will show which packets are parsed into HTTP2 messages and which are grpc messages. And user can find detail information about each packet in 'detail panel' (in left bottom).

##3. Make packets list panel only show HTTP2 (or GRPC) packets by inputting 'http2' (or 'grpc') in display filter text box:  
![wireshark_input_display_filter](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105350522-45883880-5c26-11eb-8116-df60cffe7475.gif)
Corresponding video is
https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105350526-491bbf80-5c26-11eb-9fda-d956195c0ec8.mp4

## About 'No.' Column
The 'No.' column in packet list panel means the sequence number of packet.

>       the decoded message as shown in the screenshot?

Author: Very nice! Ok, now I'm seeing that you've already loaded the capture file before starting all of this, is that correct? If so, "Loading a capture file" should come before "Setting protobuf search paths". Do you agree?

Have you had a chance to review the content of section "Loading a capture file"? Does one one use **File > Open** to open a capture file?

>       the decoded message as shown in the screenshot?

Reviewer: There is no order between "Loading a capture file" and "Setting protobuf search paths". The result of "Setting protobuf search paths" can be used not only for the file that have been opened, but also for files that will be opened later. So current order of sections are OK.

The content of section "Loading a capture file" is OK. User can use File > Open to open a capture file, or double click the a capture file icon in File Browser in windows.

>       the decoded message as shown in the screenshot?

Author: Thanks for clarifying.

<!--
TODO: Can you remove the commentary text (in blue) from the image. Such text is
      best placed in the body of the post (it makes it easier to edit, and
      eventually possibly translate into other languages :))

TODO: If a users opens up the "GRPC_Message" section in that display, what will
      be shown?
-->
![wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_request](/img/wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_request.png)

By examining the HTTP2 message header `path` field, you'll notice the URL to the
app's service (`/tutorial.PersonSearchService`), followed by the name of the
invoked RPC (`Search`).

The `content-type`, which is set by the gRPC library, informs Wireshark that the
HTTP2 message content is a gRPC message. By examining the decoded Protocol
Buffers message of the sample gRPC request, you can see that the search request
is for the names "Jason" and "Lily".

### Decoding the server-streamed response

Since the `Search` operation is defined as the server streaming RPC mode, the
Person objects can be return back to client one after another:

<!--

TODO: The response is sent over port 51035. Does a user need to configure the
      "decoding as" HTTP2 for this port?

>       It might also be worth mentioning to the reader how we know that 51035 is the response port.

Reviewer: This is the TCP client port, that is random and need not "decoding as" because it will be different for each gRPC call. So, configuring "decoding as" on server port (50051) is enough.

Author: I've added a comment to this effect.

-->
![wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_response](/img/wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_response.png)

You may have noticed that the `portrait_image` of bytes type is parsed as a
PNG data.
<!--

> TODO: Question: does the user actually see the image? If so, that isn't obvious from the screenshot.

Reviewer: User could not see the image directly, instead it contains some data about the image like:
```
portrait_image: (119 bytes)
    Portable Network Graphics
        PNG Signature: 89504e470d0a1a0a
        Image Header (IHDR)
        Standard RGB colour space (sRGB)
        Image gamma (gAMA)
        Physical pixel dimensions (pHYs)
        Image data chunk (IDAT)
        Image Trailer (IEND)
```
But user can export the binary data of the image to a file (for example named lily.png) by right clicking the node and selecting the 'export packet bytes..' menu item, and open the image with system picture viewer.

Author: Given the next comment, this won't be relevant anymore.

FIXME: Regarding the start of the sentence above: "You may have noticed that
       ..." The user can't notice the decoding of the image because we haven't
       guided them in setting up the PNG dissector prior to this point.

Suggestion: Actually, I suggest that we drop the details concerning the
       setup of the image dissector, and simply refer any interested reader to
       https://gitlab.com/wireshark/wireshark/-/wikis/Protobuf#protobuf-field-subdissectors.
       We can simply mention that subdissectors, like the PNG dissector can be

>        registered. Let me know what you think.

Reviewer: I agree with you. Maybe make this blog simpler, the better.

Author: Done

}
```

Because the service uses the `Person` type defined in `addressbook.proto`,
the address book `.proto` is imported at the start of the file.

### Setting protobuf search paths

Wireshark gives the most meaningful decodings when it knows about the `.proto`
files used by the apps whose messages you are analyzing.

You can tell Wireshark where to find `.proto` files by setting the **Protobuf
Search Paths** in the preferences accessible from the **Edit** menu under
**Preferences \> Protocols \> Protobuf**.

If our example app's `.proto` files are in the `d:/protos/my_proto_files` directory,
and the official Protobuf library directory is
`d:/protos/protobuf-3.4.1/include`, then add these two paths as _source
directories_ like this:

![Protobuf-search-paths dialog](/img/wireshark_protobuf_search_paths.png)

> By selecting the **Load all files** option for the app's protocol directory you
> enable preloading of message definitions from the `addressbook.proto` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By selecting the **Load all files** option for the app's protocol directory you
enable preloading of message definitions from the `addressbook.proto` and
`person_search_service.proto` files.
```

> ### Loading a capture file

Author: Note the new section.

Reviewer: That's fine.

From the Wireshark [SampleCaptures page][], download the following sample gRPC
capture file created by running the app and issuing a search request:
[grpc_person_search_protobuf_with_image.pcapng][].

Load this file in Wireshark by selecting **Open** from the **File** menu.

### Setting port traffic type

The app's gRPC traffic was captured on port 50051. Before you can decode the
port's messages, you need to register the port as carrying HTTP2 traffic; do
this through the **Decode As** dialog, which you access from the **Analyze**
menu:

![Decode-as dialog](/img/wireshark_decode_as_dialog.png)

### Decoding the search request message

<!--
TODO: What are the steps that the user needs to follow before the user can see
      the decoded message as shown in the screenshot?
-->
Select the first gRPC message sent to port 50051, it corresponds to the sample's
service request message. This is how Wireshark dissects the gRPC request:

<!--
TODO: I suggest reverting to the layout of the previous image, which didn't
      show the bytes pane. Also collapsing the "Stream: DATA" would be a good idea.
-->

> ![Decoded search request](/img/wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_request.png)

Reviewer: OK. I will update new request and response screenshots.

Reviewer: Hi, @chalin I've captured several request and response images. Could you choose the images you think are more suitable, and then upload them to git directly?

>Note that first request and response are filtering with 'http2' and others with 'grpc'.

Request screenshots:
![wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_request1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105361690-e847b380-5c34-11eb-884e-b835be9e3f70.png)

![wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_request2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105361703-ebdb3a80-5c34-11eb-8258-8aaee8134a86.png)

![wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_request3](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105361705-ec73d100-5c34-11eb-9cfd-a49e5b04d49d.png)

Response screenshots:
![wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_response1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105361711-eda4fe00-5c34-11eb-8956-f41284f63ccb.png)

![wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_response2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105361720-eed62b00-5c34-11eb-89cc-85fac12f7796.png)

![wireshark_grpc_protobuf_search_response3](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105361722-ef6ec180-5c34-11eb-9c51-b2994b355fe5.png)

Author: > you choose the images you think are more suitable, and then upload them to git directly?

Yes, thanks for the images, I'll choose from those.

Author: Could you give me a screenshot of Wireshark **before** setting "Decode As", in the layout of the first image from the image list above? That will allow us to explain the screen layout / panes. Thanks.

Reviewer: More images for choosing: ^_^

![wireshark_before_decode_as](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105365185-f0a1ed80-5c38-11eb-9175-186c07386b99.png)

![wireshark_before_decode_as2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105364925-ade01580-5c38-11eb-9c02-de696999557b.png)

![wireshark_before_decode_as3](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105364946-b3d5f680-5c38-11eb-8007-2425d3059616.png)

![wireshark_decode_as_above_mainwin](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105364952-b6d0e700-5c38-11eb-8fcb-8c30e219dfc1.png)

![wireshark_search_paths_on_mainwin](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105364957-ba646e00-5c38-11eb-9328-bf5ee85d4f28.png)

By examining the HTTP2 message header `path` field, you'll notice the URL to the
app's service (`/tutorial.PersonSearchService`), followed by the name of the
invoked RPC (`Search`).

The `content-type`, which is set by the gRPC library, informs Wireshark that the
HTTP2 message content is a gRPC message. By examining the decoded Protocol
Buffers message of the sample gRPC request, you can see that the search request
is for the names "Jason" and "Lily".

### Decoding the server-streamed response

<!--
TODO: What are the steps that the user needs to follow before the user can see

>       the decoded message as shown in the screenshot? Is the text given below correct?

Reviewer: After running 'decode as', user can select the packet in the packet list, the detail of the message will show in the detail panel. (Please refer to the *gif* files in my previous reply).
Your text below is OK.

TODO: How many Person objects are returned as a response? It looks like two
      from the screenshot, and the second is selected, right?

> -->

Reviewer: Yes.

### Decoding the server-streamed response

<!--
TODO: What are the steps that the user needs to follow before the user can see
      the decoded message as shown in the screenshot? Is the text given below correct?

TODO: How many Person objects are returned as a response? It looks like two
      from the screenshot, and the second is selected, right?
-->
Since the `Search` RPC response is server-streaming, `Person` objects can be
returned to the client one after another.

The response port, which can differ for each RPC call, is 51035 in the sample

> capture file. Select the second `Person` returned in the response stream and

Reviewer: The 51035 is the TCP client port, that is used for sending request and receiving response from sever. So "The response port" might be changed to "The response receiving port" or others? (I'm not very sure about the grammar.)

The HTTP2/gRPC call is based on TCP connection:

The two ends of the TCP connection are 127.0.0.1:51035 (using by TCP client) and 127.0.0.1:50051 (using by TCP server).
The gRPC client sent a request from port 51035 to server port 50051 (refer to No.12 packet).
And late, server send a response message from port 50051 to port 51035 (refer to No.16 and No.18).
Currently, the packet-list pane only displays destination port (DstPort), does not show source port.

BTW, other content of this blog looks good for me.

Reviewer: If we add source port column, it will like:
![display_source_port](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/30267326/105378186-86904500-5c46-11eb-9f3d-0fac599d25e0.png)
>Note that SrcPort and DstPort columns are added manually by users, default they are not displayed (because they can be found in packet detail pane).

Author: Ah, right! Ok, I'll merge in these changes (since the blog post is still a draft it won't be published yet), and address final changes in a followup PR. Thanks for your review and detailed feedback!
